feat(forms): initial pattern design guidance (#20)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 0121-forms-pattern-design-guidance.md

---
category: pattern design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-16
updated: 2024-10-22
---

> # Forms Pattern

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Forms Pattern Design Guidance
```

A [form](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms) is a collection of related input controls that allows a user to provide data or configure options. Forms are composed of control components such as [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox), [dropdowns](https://clarity.design/documentation/dropdown), [input fields](https://clarity.design/documentation/input), [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [toggle switches](https://clarity.design/documentation/toggle-switch) and more.

## Guidance

- **Must** be clear and simple. This will increase the quality of the response from the user and help prevent incorrect data submission.
- **Must** include controls that are required. Review each component and eliminate unnecessary ones.

> - **Must** add an asterisk after the label for required fields. Always include a legend at the top of the form to inform users that the asterisk denotes a required field. An exception to using an asterisk would be a login form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** add an asterisk after the label for required fields and **must** include a legend at the top of the form to inform users that the asterisk denotes a required field unless it's obvious that the fields are required to proceed. An exception to using an asterisk would be a login form.
```

I think we should state why exceptions to this rule exist.

- **Must not** place interactive content (buttons, links, etc) inside the label.
- **Should** group the controls logically. A form with more than six inputs will likely have inputs that can be logically grouped together, such as Address: street, city, zip, county, country, etc..
- **Should** place labels closely with their respective input fields.
- **Should** use [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox) or [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) for inputs with three or more options. We recommend placing your options vertically in one column to make it easier to scan.

> - **Should** use [Radio button](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio) or [Checkbox](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox) to compare options within the context of the form, as all selections will be visible at all times. Use [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) when you have more than six options that do not need to be compared with each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should** use [radio button](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio) or [checkbox](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox) to compare options within the context of the form, as all selections will be visible at all times. Use [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) when you have more than six options that do not need to be compared with each other.
```

> ### Horizontal Layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Horizontal Layout

```

missing blank line after heading

> - **Should** choose Horizontal Layout if the screen has limited vertical place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should** choose horizontal layout if the screen has limited vertical place.
```

- **Should** choose this layout when you want the labels to be highlighted to the customer, as all labels will be in single column.
- Ideal for longer forms.

> ### Vertical Layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Vertical Layout

```

missing blank line after heading

> - **Should** choose this layout for Narrow or mobile screens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Should** choose this layout for narrow or mobile screens.
```

> ### Validation Guidelines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Validation Guidelines

```

missing blank line after heading

- **Must** follow [error message styling](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms#error-message-styling) guidelines.
- The error messages **must** be as clear as possible. The content should provide clear guidance about how to fix the error.
- **Must not** validate the form when user is typing. This can frustrate them. Exceptions are below

>     -- Inputs with sensitive field value lengths (such as tweets).
>     -- When users return to an error field and successfully edit the error field.
>     -- For password fields with visible password strength criteria.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Inputs with sensitive field value lengths (such as tweets).
  - When users return to an error field and successfully edit the error field.
  - For password fields with visible password strength criteria.
```

The sub list does not render correctly.

---
category: pattern design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-16
updated: 2024-10-22
---

# Forms Pattern Design Guidance

> A [form](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms) is a collection of related input controls that allows a user to provide data or configure options. Forms are composed of control components such as [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox), [dropdowns](https://clarity.design/documentation/dropdown), [input fields](https://clarity.design/documentation/input), [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [toggle switches](https://clarity.design/documentation/toggle-switch) and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A [form](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms) is a collection of related input controls that enables users to provide data or configure options. Forms consist of various control components, including [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox), [dropdowns](https://clarity.design/documentation/dropdown), [input fields](https://clarity.design/documentation/input), [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [toggle switches](https://clarity.design/documentation/toggle-switch), and more, facilitating effective data entry and user interaction.
```

## Guidance

> - **Must** be clear and simple. This will increase the quality of the response from the user and help prevent incorrect data submission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Design teams **must** ensure that forms are clear and simple, as this increases the quality of user responses and helps prevent incorrect data submissions.
```

> - **Must** include controls that are required. Review each component and eliminate unnecessary ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams must include only required controls in forms, eliminating unnecessary components to streamline the user experience.
```

> - **Must** add an asterisk after the label for required fields and include a legend at the top of the form to inform users that the asterisk denotes a required field unless it's obvious that the fields are required to proceed. An example exception of an exception to this rule is a login form.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** add an asterisk after the label for required fields and include a legend at the top of the form stating that the asterisk denotes a required field. An exception to this rule is a login form, where users generally understand that both fields are required.
```

> - **Must not** place interactive content (buttons, links, etc) inside the label.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** place interactive content, such as buttons or links, inside the label, as this can confuse users and hinder usability.
```

> - **Should** group the controls logically. A form with more than six inputs will likely have inputs that can be logically grouped together. For example, inputs for street, city, zip, county, country, etc. can be grouped as an address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** logically group controls in forms, especially when there are more than six inputs. For example, street, city, zip, county, and country can be grouped as an address to improve clarity and organization. However, in simpler forms or when user preferences differ, grouping may not always be necessary.
```

- **Should** place labels closely with their respective input fields.

> - **Should** use [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox) or [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) for inputs with three or more options. We recommend placing your options vertically in one column to make it easier to scan.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use [radio buttons](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio), [checkboxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox), or [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) for inputs with three or more options. Options should be placed vertically in one column to facilitate easier scanning and selection. This layout also enhances accessibility by improving keyboard navigation and ensuring clear communication with screen readers.
```

- **Should** use [radio button](https://clarity.design/documentation/radio) or [checkbox](https://clarity.design/documentation/checkbox) to compare options within the context of the form, as all selections will be visible at all times. Use [select boxes](https://clarity.design/documentation/select) when you have more than six options that do not need to be compared with each other.

### Horizontal Layout

> - **Should** choose horizontal layout if the screen has limited vertical place.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** choose a horizontal layout when vertical space is limited, as this approach allows users to view all options at once, reducing scrolling and improving accessibility for quick selections.
```

> - **Should** choose this layout when you want the labels to be highlighted to the customer, as all labels will be in single column.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** choose this layout when highlighting labels for users. A single-column format ensures that all labels are prominently displayed and easily readable.
```

> - Ideal for longer forms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams should use a horizontal layout for longer forms. This approach allows for better organization of information, making it easier for users to navigate and complete the form efficiently.
```

### Vertical Layout

> - **Should** choose this layout for narrow or mobile screens.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** choose a vertical layout for narrow or mobile screens. This format ensures better readability and accessibility, allowing users to navigate through the content without excessive scrolling.
```

### Validation Guidelines

> - **Must** follow [error message styling](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms#error-message-styling) guidelines.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** follow the [error message styling](https://clarity.design/documentation/forms#error-message-styling) guidelines to ensure that error messages are clearly communicated to users, which helps them quickly identify and correct issues in the form.
```

> - The error messages **must** be as clear as possible. The content should provide clear guidance about how to fix the error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** ensure that error messages are clear and straightforward. The content should provide specific guidance on how to fix the error, helping users understand the necessary steps to correct their input.
```

> - **Must not** validate the form when user is typing. This can frustrate them. Exceptions are below

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams must not validate the form while the user is typing, as this can lead to frustration. Exceptions to this rule are noted below.
```

>   - Inputs with sensitive field value lengths (such as tweets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Inputs that require validation for sensitive field value lengths, such as tweets.
```

>   - When users return to an error field and successfully edit the error field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - When users return to an error field and successfully correct the input.
```

>   - For password fields with visible password strength criteria.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - For password fields that display visible password strength criteria.
```

> - **Must not** use unrecognizable system error messages like "code 500 error" as error messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must not** use unrecognizable system error messages, such as "code 500 error," as error messages.
```
